
File:Artists concept of collision at HD 172555.jpg
Theia () is a List of hypothetical Solar System objectsSuch a collision with the two planets cores and mantles fusing could explain why Earths core is larger than expected for a body its size. Collision simulations support the idea that the large low-shear-velocity provinces in the lower mantle may be remnants of Theia. Theia is hypothesized to have been about the size of Mars and may have formed in the outer Solar System and Origin of water on Earth
Name
In Greek mythology Theia was one of the Titans. She was the mother of Selene the goddess of the Moon a story that parallels the planet Theias theorized role in creating the Moon.

Orbit
Theia is hypothesized to have orbited in the Lagrange pointL4 and L5
Collision
File:Big Splash Theia.gif
According to the Giant-impact hypothesis
Computer simulations suggest that Theia was traveling no faster than  when it struck Earth at an estimated 45-degree angle.

Initially the hypothesis supposed that Theia had struck Earth with a glancing blow Such accounts assumed that a head-on impact would have destroyed both planets creating a short-lived second asteroid belt between the orbits of Venus and Mars.

In contrast evidence published in January 2016 suggests that the impact was indeed a head-on collision and that Theias remains are on Earth and the Moon.

Hypotheses

From the beginning of modern astronomy there have been at least four hypotheses for the origin of the Moon:
 A single body split into Earth and Moon
 The Moon was captured by Earths gravity (as most of the Outer planet The Earth and Moon formed at the same time when the protoplanetary disk accretion (astrophysics) The Theia-impact scenario described above

The lunar rock samples retrieved by Apollo program
By 2012 theories found Theia could explain why Earths core is larger than expected for a body its size; Theias core and mantle could have fused with those of Earth. It is also hypothesized that the large low-shear-velocity provinces detected deep in Earths mantle may be fragments of Theia. In 2023 computer simulations reinforced that hypothesis.

Evidence published in 2019 suggests that Theia might have formed in the outer Solar System and that much of Origin of water on Earth
See also
* Disrupted planet
* Nibiru cataclysm
* Phaeton (hypothetical planet)
* Synestia

References
Reflist
<ref name"TheiaPothesis">
cite web

</ref>

<ref name"Stereo">
cite web
        
</ref>

















