
Infobox medical intervention


Ring vaccination is a strategy to inhibit the spread of a disease by vaccinating those who are most likely to be infected.

This strategy vaccinates the contacts of confirmed patients and people who are in close contact with those contacts. This way everyone who has been or could have been exposed to a patient receives the vaccine creating a ring of protection that can limit the spread of a pathogen.

Ring vaccination requires thorough and rapid surveillance and Epidemiology
Medical use
File:Bundesarchiv Bild 183-92498-0001 Berlin Ruhrepedemie Impfung.jpg
When someone falls ill people they might have infected should be vaccinated. Contacts who might have been infected typically include family neighbours and friends. Several layers of contacts may be vaccinated (the contacts the contacts contacts the contacts contacts contacts etc.).

Ring vaccination relies on contact tracing to determine possible infections. However this can be difficult. In some cases it is preferable to vaccinate as many people as possible within the geographic area of known infection (geographically-targeted reactive vaccination). If the infections occur within a defined geographic boundary it may be preferable to vaccinate the entire community in which the illness has appeared rather than explicitly tracing contacts.

Many vaccines take several weeks to induce immunity and thus do not provide immediate protection. However even if some of the ill persons contacts are already infected ring vaccination can prevent the virus from being transmitted again to the ill contacts contacts. A few vaccines can protect even if they are given just after infection; ring vaccination is somewhat more effective for vaccines providing this post-exposure prophylaxis.

Advantages
When responding to a possible outbreak health officials should consider which is best ring vaccination or mass vaccination. In some outbreaks it might be better to only vaccinate those directly exposed; variable factors (such as demographics and the vaccine that is available) can make one method or the other safer with fewer people experiencing side-effects when the same number are protected from the disease.

History
Ring vaccination was used in Leicester England in the late 19th-century.
It was also used in the mid-20th century in the eradication of smallpox.<ref>Cite journal
  </ref>

It was used experimentally in the Ebola virus epidemic in West Africa.

In 2018 health authorities used a ring vaccination strategy to try to suppress the 2018 Équateur province Ebola outbreak. This involved vaccinating only those most likely to be infected; direct contacts of infected individuals and contacts of those contacts. The vaccine used was rVSV-ZEBOV.

Ring vaccination has been used extensively in the 2018 Kivu Ebola outbreak with over 90000 people vaccinated. In April 2019 the WHO published the preliminary results of the research by its research in association with the DRCs Institut National pour la Recherche Biomedicale into the effectiveness of the ring vaccination program stating that the rVSV-ZEBOV-GP vaccine had been 97.5% effective at stopping Ebola transmission relative to no vaccination.

See also
* Cocooning (immunization)
* Herd immunity
* Pulse vaccination strategy
* Targeted immunization strategies
* Vaccination

References


Further reading
* 



