


D-Orbit is a Private spaceflight
D-orbit is mainly active in the Space tug also known as orbital transfer vehicle (OTV) market. While this concept has existed for several decades it is only in the last few years that more examples are being produced and used.

D-Orbit has been operating commercial ION missions since September 2020 EnduroSat Elecnor Deimos University of Southern California SatRevolution and Kleos Space
 History 
File:Artistic_rendition_of_ION_Satellite_Carrier_while_deploying_a_satellite.pngD-Orbit was founded in 2011 by Luca Rossettini currently serving as Chief executive officer
The companys initial focus was the development of a smart and autonomous decommissioning motor for satellites and launcher stages called D3 (D-Orbit Decommissioning Device). In 2015 the D3 project was partially funded by the European Union under the framework of Horizon 2020.

This provided the origin of the D-orbit name being just a contraction of the term "de-orbit" which denotes an orbital manoeuver that pulls a spacecraft out of its operational orbit and inserts it into a reentry trajectory that will eventually cause it to burn up upon atmospheric entry.

In 2017 the company began the development of ION Satellite Carrier an Space tugThe Space tug
In 2022 the company planned to go public via a SPAC with a valuation of $1.4bn however this was cancelled.

In June 2022 the company gained an award of around 1.95&nbsp;million Euros from the European Space Agency though a Boost! award.

Products and space launches
File:ION_Satellite_Carrier_in_the_integration_room.jpgThe initial plan was to create a product to deorbit satellites at the end of their life. However the company has moved on to space tugs also known as orbital transfer vehicles (OTV). D-orbit developed the ION Satellite Carrier formerly known as ION CubeSat Carrier. The company aims to address the space logistics needs of customers by reducing the time needed to transfer a single spacecraft or a batch of satellites belonging to a Satellite constellation
 Main product: ION Satellite Carrier 
ION Satellite Carrier is a satellite platform with a configurable payload bay that can be equipped with a combination of proprietary or third-party launch dispensers  third-party payloads Microsatellite (spaceflight)
Through the course of a mission ION Satellite Carrier can travel across orbits characterized by different orientation altitude and Longitude of the ascending node
Launches


The first mission was launched in September 2020 with the successful deployment of 12 SuperDove satellites for Satellite imagery
In January 2021 D-Orbit launched a second ION mission Pulse which successfully deployed 20 satellites after performing a 10km orbit raise and demonstrated the ability to change the Longitude of the ascending node
During its third mission launched in June 2021 the company deployed six satellites and demonstrated 12 hosted payloads including D-Orbits proprietary in-orbit cloud computing platform and data storage service built in collaboration with Swedish-based Artificial intelligence
The fourth mission Dashing Through the Stars launched in January 2022 deployed six satellites and tested several in-space cloud applications on an upgraded version of its in-orbit cloud platform.<!--Maybe between these 4 refs we are getting there. Delete fv?-->

The fifth mission Spacelust launched on 1 April 2022 deployed 4 satellites for Kleos Space 3 satellites for the University of Chile and one for Upmosphere.

The sixth mission Infinite Blue launched on 25 May 2022 deployed Guardian for Aistech Space and SBUDNIC for Brown University. There were also hosted payloads from Cryptosat and Genergo for in-orbit demonstration. 

Two of D-Orbits space tugs were launched on SpaceXs Transporter-6 mission on 3 January 2023 to release nine satellites: four cubesats for a data relay and asset tracking constellation owned by the Swiss company Astrocast two for Futura which includes NPS Spacemind Kelpie a 9-pound (4-kilogram) CubeSat to provide maritime tracking services for Orbcomm Sharjah Sat 1 for Sharjah Academy for Astronomy and TauSat 2 for Tel Aviv University. There are also third-party hosted payloads by the Instituto de Astrofisica de Canarias Genergo Cryptosat and an undisclosed customers hosted payload.

The ninth space tug SVC009 Eclectic Elena was launched on 31 January 2023 as a rideshare on the Starlink 2-6 mission and the mission was called Starfield. There was an in orbit demonstration of a satellite simulator for EBAD and hosted payloads for HPF EPFL and StardustMe.

As of January 2023 the company has launched nine spacecraft and brought over 100 payloads to space. <!-- As of 14 April 2023 this section reads hosted payloads 30 Satellites deployed 73 (103 payloads) -->

 References 


 External links 
https://www.dorbit.space/ Official website

