

The Now Explosion was an early experiment in music video produced in Atlanta Georgia in 1970 more than a decade before MTV was launched. The program was televised in Atlanta on WATL-TV and later WTCG-TV (now WPCH-TV).

 History 
In 1968 and 1969 veteran broadcaster Bob Whitney (broadcaster)
Whitneys aim was to create a cost-effective television program that would emulate the success of Top 40 radio all the way down to the use of an unseen disk jockey. The concept was born about ten years before the arrival of MTV.

In 1970 The Now Explosion began its first regular broadcasts on Atlantas WATL-TV where it aired 28 hours each weekend. By this time the show was produced at WATLs studios.

Programs were television syndication
After 13 weeks at WATL Ted Turner contracted to carry the program for a television station he had recently acquired WTCG-TV. WATL Off-the-air
After 26 weeks in syndication in early 1971 Whitney cancelled The Now Explosion when the high costs of production and distribution outpaced the commercial revenue.

Turner would once again enter the music video television business with the debut of Night Tracks in 1983 which lasted nine years and Cable Music Channel (albeit for only a month) in 1984.

 Special effects 
The special effects used in The Now Explosion seem crude in later years but they were state of the art for the early 1970s era. Video was shot with heavy non portable studio cameras on large rolling tripods. The music videos were recorded on two inch magnetic tape. The video editing required the use of three massive and costly "quad" tape recorders allowing only simple transitions such as cuts and dissolves.

Most performers were young amateurs recruited from the Atlanta audience. Many appeared with home-grown costumes - often after midnight when station facilities became available - and were recorded dancing extemporaneously as rock rhythms were piped into an almost bare and darkened studio. The lighting often placed performers "in limbo" so that only the illuminated dancers were seen against darkened studio walls. Extensive special effects were added in post production as images were combined and distorted to form what production people often called "eye candy."

Common special effects included aiming the camera into a monitor that said camera is connected to - a technique called "Optical feedback
Other images and effects came from an Atlanta 1960s style light show venture called the "Electric Collage." The Electric Collage production company was popular at major rock concerts and rock festivals. The producers of the Electric Collage visual music were able to produce complex lighting effects with projectors that were not possible using the video technology of the day.

 Archive recovery 

In 2000 The Walter J. Brown Media Archives and Peabody Awards Archives at University of Georgia in Athens Georgia
 Sources 
* Atlanta Journal-Constitution: "Years before MTV an Atlanta TV show created its own music videos. It was psychedelic. It was far out. It was the. . .Now Explosion" August 3 2000 page F1
* Atlanta Journal-Constitution: "Totally Cool Update: Far-out archives unearthed amid Now reunion" March 30 2001 page E1

 External links 
* 
* http://www.thenowexplosion.net/3segmaster1.html 30 Minute Excerpt Collection Video
* http://www.libs.uga.edu/media/collections/tv/nowexplosion.html UGA Walter J. Brown Media Archives
* http://www.yubatube.com/necredits.html Some Performer Credits
* http://electriccollage.com/ Electric Collage light show


