



Concussions a type of mild traumatic brain injury are a frequent concern for those playing sports from children and teenagers to professional athletes. Repeated concussions are known to cause neurological disorders particularly chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE) which in professional athletes has led to premature retirement erratic behavior and even suicide. A sports-related concussion is defined as a "complex pathophysiological process affecting the brain induced by biomechanical forces". Because concussions cannot be seen on X-rays or CT scans attempts to prevent concussions have been difficult.

The danger of repeated concussions has long been known for boxing
As of 2012 the Major professional sports leagues in the United States and Canada
 Dangers 
Concussion symptoms can last for an undetermined amount of time depending on the player and the severity of the concussion. Concussion symptoms can be described as immediate and delayed. The immediate symptoms experienced after concussions include  memory loss disorientation and poor balance. Delayed symptoms experienced in the later stages include sleeping disorders and behavioral changes. Both immediate and delayed symptoms can continue for long periods of time and have a negative impact on recovery.

 Post-concussion syndrome 
There is the potential of post-concussion syndrome defined as a set of symptoms that continue after a concussion is sustained.

 Second-impact syndrome 
Ignoring concussions makes athletes more vulnerable to incurring further head trauma stressing the importance of rigorous concussion testing protocols in professional sports. Subsequent impact can cause a rare condition known as second-impact syndrome which can result in severe injury or death. Second-impact syndrome is a result of a second head injury before the brain has adequate time to heal between concussions. It typically give signs and symptoms of a post-concussion syndrome (visual motor or sensory abnormalities and difficulties with cognitive processes). Even minor repeated head blow may result in malignant cerebral edema and even death. Nonetheless second-impact syndrome is an infrequent finding predominately involving young athletes and only rarely is fatal.

 Risk from repeated concussions 
Repeated concussions have been linked to a variety of neurological disorders among athletes including chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE) Alzheimers disease Parkinsonism and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).

Repeated concussions or mild-to-moderate Traumatic brain injury
 Other risks 
In addition returning to sports with impaired sensorimotor function after experiencing a sports-related concussion increases the risk of sustaining musculoskeletal (MSK) injuries. In addition athletes that experience a concussion are twice as likely to sustain a musculoskeletal injury compared to non-concussed athletes.

 Incidence 
It is estimated that as many as 1.6–3.8 million concussions occur in the US per year in competitive sports and recreational activities; this is a rough estimate since as many as 50% of concussions go unreported. Concussions occur in all sports with the highest incidence in American football ice hockey rugby soccer and basketball. Less than 10% of cases experience a loss of consciousness and many typical symptoms appear after the initial concussion evaluation. The overall incidence risk of concussion is higher in adults than in youth as the injury rate per 1000 athletic exposures for youth is 0.23 compared to 0.28 in collegiate athletes.

An analysis of National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) injury reports estimated concussion rates among student athletes who participate in NCAA sports during the 2011–2012 through 2014–2015 academic years:

! rowspan"2" ! colspan"1" rowspan"2" ! colspan"3" rowspan"1" ! colspan"1" rowspan"1" ! colspan"1" rowspan"1" ! colspan"1" rowspan"1" ! rowspan"7" ! rowspan"6" 
 Women in sport 
Numerous reports have indicated that womens sports
Womens ice hockey was reported as one of the most dangerous sports in the NCAA with a concussion rate of 2.72 per 1000 player hours. Even though mens ice hockey allows body checking while womens ice hockey does not the rate of concussions for men is 46% lower at 1.47 per 1000 player hours. College football also has lower concussion rates than womens hockey with a rate of 2.34 per 1000.

Womens basketball is one of the womens sports with the highest risks of getting a concussion. Women have a greater risk of getting a concussion by dribbling/ball handling rather than defending. Also it was found that female college basketball players typically receive concussions during games rather than practices.

 By sport 
 American football 

American football causes 250000 concussions annually and 20% of high-school football players experience a concussion every year. In 2000 researchers from the Sports Medicine Research Laboratory at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill analyzed 17549 players from 242 different schools. 888 (5.1%) of the players analyzed have at least one concussion a season and 131 (14.7%) of them have had another concussion the year later. NCAA Division III
 National Football League policy 

The National Football Leagues (NFL) policy began in 2007 with injured players examined on field by the medical team. In 2011 the league introduced an assessment test which combines a symptoms checklist a limited neurological examination a cognitive evaluation and a balance assessment. For a player to be allowed to return he must be asymptomatic.

If a player is cleared by the Unaffiliated Neurotrauma Consultant (UNC) then they are allowed to play but will be monitored closely throughout the game. If a player is diagnosed with a concussion then that player is not allowed back in the game. A return to play process is issued which includes five steps "1. Rest and recovery 2. Light aerobic exercise 3. Continued aerobic exercise/strength training 4. Football specific activities 5. Full football activity/clearance"

Almost every team has experienced a player who will "keep playing then manage to stumble off the field unnoticed by the coaches cameras or press. He might take a breather for a series or two. But he can walk so he wants to play. He gets back in the game and back to his teammates."

According to Johns Hopkins University a study took place which "researchers recruited nine former NFL players who retired decades ago and who ranged in age from 57 to 74. The men had played a variety of positions and self-reported a wide range of concussions varying from none for a running back to 40 for a defensive tackle."

 Association football 
Association football— also known as soccer— is a major source of sports-related concussions around the world. Even though 50–80% of injuries in football are directed to the legs head injuries have been shown to account for between 4 and 22% of football injuries. There is the possibility that heading the ball could damage the head as the ball can travel at 100&nbsp;km/hour; although most professional footballers have reported that they experienced head injuries from colliding with other players and the ground.
A multi-year study by the University of Colorado published in JAMA Pediatrics confirmed that athlete-to-athlete collisions that occur during heading not impact with the ball itself is generally the cause for concussion.

A 1992 Norway
During the 2006-07 FA Premier League
According to Downs and Abwender in their 2002 article "Neuropsychological Impairment in Soccer Athletes" "participation in soccer may be associated with poorer neuropsychological performance although the observed pattern of findings does not specifically implicate heading as the cause".

On 2 November 2013 in a match between Tottenham Hotspur F.C.
There has been widespread debate on protective headgear in soccer. Known as a sport associated with intricate footwork speed and well-timed passes soccer also is classified as a high- to moderate-intensity contact/collision sport with rates of head injury and concussion similar to those seen in football ice hockey lacrosse and rugby. While the benefits of helmets and other head protection are more obvious in the other sports the role of headgear in soccer was unclear .

There are clear rules from FIFA regarding what to do when a player gets a concussion. FIFAs guidelines say that a player who has been knocked unconscious should not play again that day. The rules do however allow for "a transient alteration of conscious level" following a head injury which says that a player can return to play following assessment by medical staff. The rules also state that a player who is injured with head damage is not to be played for five days.

 Auto racing 
The Death of Dale Earnhardt
In 2012 when Dale Earnhardt Jr. suffered a concussion from a crash at the end of the 2012 Good Sam Roadside Assistance 500
 Baseball 

Major League Baseballs (MLB) policy started in 2007 with injured players examined by a team athletic trainer on the field. On 29 March 2011 Major League Baseball* All teams are to run baseline neurocognitive testing for all players and umpires using the ImPACT (Immediate Post-Concussion Assessment and Cognitive Testing) system during spring training or after a player signing.
* If a player sustains head impact during a game the play is stopped and the players injury is assessed.
*A Certified Athletic Trainer (ATC) can evaluate and treat a player during a game.
*Trainers can remove the player from the game and to the clubhouse for further evaluation if the player has sustained a concussion.
*The Team Physician may also evaluate the player in the clubhouse. Player completes the SCAT3(Sport Concussion Assessment Tool version 3)form in the clubhouse. If the player seems to not have sustained a concussion he can return the game.The trainer can then evaluate the player throughout the entirety of the game after the injury occurs. If the player is thought to have a concussion the team the trainer and team physician can determine whether to place the player on the 7-day or 10 day injured List (IL).
*Players on a 7-day concussion IL still unable to return to play after nine days are automatically transferred to a 10-day IL.

 Basketball 

In the 2005 high school basketball year 3.6% of reported injuries were concussions with 30.5% of concussions occurring during rebounds. Incidence rates for concussions in NCAA mens basketball is lower than NCAA womens basketball at 0.16 concussion per 1000 athletes compared to 0.22 per 1000 athletes respectively. The difference is found mainly in competition activity compared to practice.

 National Basketball Association policy 
On 12 December 2011 the National Basketball Association (NBA) announced the establishment of a concussions policy for league. The players and staff must have annual education on topics surrounding concussion during play including mechanisms of injury signs symptoms and interventions. The policies surrounding concussion management in National Basketball Association
* If concussion is suspected the injured player is removed from the game immediately and monitored to ensure safety. A neurological exam is conducted by the teams physician or athletic trainer.
* For 24 hours after the primary evaluation the player is monitored closely by the teams medical staff so long as they are not diagnosed with a concussion. The player must complete at least one other evaluation before the next game or practice whichever comes first.
*If the player is diagnosed with a concussion they are prohibited from participating (on the same day or the next day) and must undergo the requried return-to-participation protocol.
*The player under direction of the teams medical staff must avoid physical exertion and exposure to electronic devices so as not to aggravate symptoms. Physical activity must be reintroduced gradually according to the medical staffs discretion.
*A physician must provide an assessment regarding the presence or absence of concussion within 24 hours of the incident. In addition the Director of the NBA Concussion Program must be informed about the concussion evaluation.

 Bicycling 
Bicycling is a sport that places participants at risk of concussions and head injuries. Each year in the US there are approximately 80000 bicycling related head injuries that require treatment in an emergency room. Roughly 33% of non-fatal bicyclist injuries are to the head. Many casual and even professional bicyclists dont take safety precautions seriously and in 2016 more than half of bicyclists involved in fatal crashes were reported not wearing a helmet.

 Boxing 
Despite boxings violent nature a National Safety Council report in 1996 ranked amateur boxing as the safest contact sport in America. However concussions are one of the most serious injuries that can occur from boxing and in an 80-year span from 1918 to 1998 there were 659 boxers who died from brain injury. Rates of concussion in boxing may be miscalculated because concussions do not always result from a knockout blow.
Olympic boxers deliver punches with high impact velocity but lower head injury criterion and translational acceleration than in football impacts because of a lower effective punch mass. They cause proportionately more rotational acceleration than in football. Modeling shows that the greatest strain is in the midbrain late in the exposure after the primary impact acceleration in boxing and football.

Muhammad Ali possibly the most famous boxer of all time was "diagnosed with a cluster of symptoms that resemble Parkinsons disease known as Parkinsons syndrome which his doctor believed were caused by numerous blows to the head" which led to his death in 2016.

 Cricket 

Head injuries that result in concussion are a significant cause of injury in cricket with the rate of concussion for elite male cricket estimated at an annual average of 0.9 per 100 players.

 Gymnastics 
As many skills in gymnastics involve flipping or a blind landing incidence of head injury is increased. A 15-year study found an incidence of 1.7% for concussion and closed head injury for high school gymnasts.

 Ice Hockey 
Ice hockey has also been known to have concussions inflict numerous players. Because of this the NHL made hockey helmets mandatory in the 1979–80 NHL season. According to a data release by the National Academy of Neuropsychologys Sports Concussion Symposium from 2006 to 2011 765 NHL players were diagnosed with a concussion. At the Mayo Clinic Sports Medicine Center Ice Hockey Summit: Action on Concussion conference in 2010 a panel made a recommendation that blows to the head are to be prohibited and to outlaw checking (ice hockey)
 National Hockey League policy 
The National Hockey Leagues (NHL) concussion policy began in 1997 and players who sustain concussions are evaluated by a team doctor in a quiet room.

Dr. Paul Echlin and Dr. Martha Shenton of Brigham and Womens Hospital and other researchers conducted a study where "Forty-five male and female Canadian university hockey players were observed by independent physicians during the 2011–2012 season. All 45 players were given M.R.I. scans before and after the season. The 11 who received a concussion diagnosis during the season were given additional scans within 72 hours two weeks and two months of the incident. The scans found microscopic white matter and inflammatory changes in the brains of individuals who had sustained a clinically diagnosed concussion during the period of the study."

quote
 Rugby union 

Concussions are also a significant factor in rugby union another full-contact sport. In 2011 the sports world governing body World Rugby (then known as the International Rugby Board or IRB) issued a highly detailed policy for dealing with injured players with suspected concussions. Under the policy a player suffering from a suspected concussion is not allowed to return to play in that game. Players are not cleared to play after the injury for a minimum of 21 days unless they are being supervised in their recovery by a medical practitioner. Even when medical advice is present players must complete a multi-step monitoring process before being cleared to play again; this process requires a minimum of six days. In 2012 the IRB modified the policy instituting a Pitchside Suspected Concussion Assessment (PSCA) under which players suspected of having suffered concussions are to leave the field for 5&nbsp;minutes while doctors assess their condition via a series of questions. Players who pass the PSCA are allowed to return to play.

However an incident during the third Test of the 2013 British & Irish Lions tour to Australia
In 2013 former Scotland national rugby union team
Lamont was also critical of the PSCA noting:
cquote
The Concussion bin was replaced by the head bin in 2012 with the players assessment taking 10 minutes. If concussed the player must then recover by first returning to general activities in life then progressing back to playing. Returning to play the player must follow the Graduated Return to Play (GRTP) protocol by having clearance from a medical professional and no symptoms of concussion.

 Youth sports 


Many children and teenagers participate in sports and Extracurricular activity
In 2010 more high school soccer players suffered concussions than basketball baseball wrestling and softball players combined according to the Center for Injury Research and Policy. According to a study in the JAMA Pediatrics medical journal many girls do not get necessary care and prevention regarding concussions and 56 percent of players (or their families) reporting concussion symptoms never sought treatment.

A growing topic is concussions in girls soccer predominantly among high-school girls. Studies show that girls are reporting nearly twice as many concussions as boys in the sports that they both play. The number of girls suffering concussions in soccer accounts for the second largest amount of all concussions reported by young athletes.

Concussion often results in a myriad of symptoms including difficulty concentrating focusing and remembering that are typically managed with rest from daily activities namely school for symptomatic youth. The consensus is that concussions have negligible effect on educational performance and school grades in youth.

 Prevention efforts and technologies 
There have been numerous attempts at preventing concussions such as the establishment of the PACE (Protecting Athletes Through Concussion Education) program which works with the imPACT system used by every NFL and some NHL teams . In 2008 the Arena Football League tested an impact monitor created by Schutt Sports called the "Shockometer" which is a triangular device attached to the back of football helmets that has a light on the device that turns red when a concussion occurs. Riddell Sports Group Inc.
In addition to force impact sensors used to assess traumatic brain injury studies have been conducted to assess levels of biological markers for the presence of brain concussion. A variety of concurrently researched biomarkers have been associated with concussions including S100B Tau protein and glial fibrillary acid protein (GFAP). In 2018 the Food and Drug Administration
Neck collar technology is being explored for more widespread use in sports since 2019. The Q-Collar (previously known as Bauer Neuroshield) is an example of such a device. Neck collars are designed to gently constrict blood flow through the jugular vein in the neck increasing fluid pressure in the head. Despite being unable to prevent serious traumatic brain injury the device has been associated with a protective effect against microstructural changes in the brain after regular impact. However further research is necessary to determine if the devices efficacy is substantiated. Since Health Canadas approval of the Q-Collar as a Class 1 Medical Devices a few players in the Canadian Football League have used it in play.

Efforts to manage concussion risk in youth and high school sports include online informational resources designed for coaches and parents. For example the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
A systematic review investigated the effects of policies on preventing sports injuries of children at school (ages 4–18) including 26 policies 14 of which were from the US and 10 of which were concussion-specific . Of the 10 studies specific to concussion and 6 studies on guidelines on preventing concussions. The most common recommendation for primary prevention was the "education of athletes colleagues and the public ...". Several other guidelines included rule changes and the adherence of rules during games. Regarding helmets there was consensus that they may not always protect against concussions. 2 guidelines recommended the development of concussion policies or the incorporation of concussions into existing head injury policies. Another 2 guidelines recommended supervision of sports injuries. Further research into the effectiveness of guidance for schools on concussion prevention is needed.

A systematic review conducted by the Social Science Research Unit in London in 2007 concluded that athletic injuries for young people (ages 12–24) are reduced under supervision by a coach however strong evidence for interventions to reduce sports-related injuries remains lacking. As such the authors endorse the establishment of a national sports injury database in order to strengthen the base of evidence for interventions. The review outlined several interventions to prevent injuries specific to certain sports.

 Rugby 
Custom-fitted mouth guards were found to be effective in 4 of 5 studies done in a review. Having the playing season in the autumn/winter decreases the risk of injury with the highest risk occurring in the summer. Another study found a change in the rules associated with tackles scrums and mauls decrease the number of rugby union players suffering permanent quadriplegia.

 Play in public playgrounds and sports fields 
A UK-based community study found reductions in injury rates after the removal of monkey bars and increases in depth of the bark beneath equipment. A community intervention trial in New Zealand concluded the effectiveness of programs encouraging schools to reduce playground hazards. Another study found a change of environment in sports fields and playgrounds to reduce the incidence of injuries including quick release bases bases which detach easily from the ground upon contact with a player sliding often used in recreational softball.

 Baseball 
Two reviews independently concluded that modified/break-away bases are more effective than standard bases in the prevention of sliding-related injuries.

 Ice hockey 
A review found regulatory approaches to be effective in reducing injury rates. E.g. mandatory use of protective equipment implementation of new rules such as disallowing checking from behind and high sticking (raising the stick above shoulder height). A study found an inverse relationship between ice surface size and injury rate and the use of correctly fitted helmets in injury reduction. Another review found an association between the use of face protectors and a decrease in facial injuries.

 Alpine skiing 
Ten low-quality studies in a review suggested the beneficial effects of lessons for beginners mainly composed of children and young adults. Sensation seeking and risk-taking behavior appear to be two domains that need to be addressed in order to optimize prevention efforts for traumatic brain injury in this sport.

 Horse riding 
A review found one multi-agency collaboration in publicising the risks of head injury effective in raising awareness and increasing sales of horse-riding helmets.

 American football 
A review concluded that the use of face protectors is effective in decreasing facial injuries. Moreover it was concluded that mouth guards lead to less oral and head injuries. Conflicting evidence was found for the use of knee braces.

 Bicycling 
One approach to reduction of head injuries in bicycling involves developing and improving helmets in order to protect bicyclists in the event of an accident that results in a blow to the head.

 Media coverage 
Recent documentaries and films such as Concussion (2015 film)
Sports concussion has been discussed in mainstream media over many years. Media coverage of professional athletes experiencing irreversible damage after repeated brain trauma and of the under-reported rates and risks of paediatric concussion have heightened awareness surrounding head injury in sports and recreation. The frequency of concussion in some of the worlds biggest sports such as soccer football and rugby has increased the amount of media coverage.

Terminology in media for sports related concussions differs based on the geographical location. Articles in America used the descriptors "head trauma" (11.7%) and "brain trauma" (6.8%) the most while articles from the UK and Ireland primarily mentioned "blow to head" (22.2%). Australia used the descriptors "head injury" (57.1%) and "brain injury" (28.6%) the most while New Zealand used "head knock" (46.7%) "head clash" (13.3%) and "brain damage" (13.3%). For the consequences of concussion the UK and Ireland mentioned "Second Impact Syndrome "(22.2%) "Chronic Traumatic Encephalopathy" (22.2%) and "Parkinsons disease and other neurological conditions" (11.1%) the most. America most commonly mentioned "Alzheimers dementia and neurocognitive problems" (13.6%) and "Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis" (11.7%) while Canada saw the most frequent mention of "depression and suicide" (10.5%). Also the use of misleading terms such as "mild concussion" "minor concussion" and "slight concussion" are commonplace in the media. Although media articles are often written by individuals (i.e. journalists) who are not medically trained these articles have been found to potentially influence perceptions regarding concussion for a wide audience due to the global reach of the internet.

In 2012 film producer Steve James (producer)
League of Denial was a 2013 book by sports reporters Mark Fainaru-Wada and Steve Fainaru about concussions within the NFL. The American documentary series Frontline (U.S. TV series)
 Policies summary 

 Policies by major professional sports league 
!League
!Year policy introduced
!Year baseline testing began
!Year current policy began
!First step after injury
!Person who approves/denies player to return
!Person who decides player return
!National Football League! MLB
! NBA
! NHL
!Major League Soccer!NASCAR

 See also 

* Concussions in Australian sport
* Concussion grading systems
* Head injury criterion
* Shock data logger
* Impact sensor
* Sports-related traumatic brain injury
* Concussions in high school sports

 References 


External links
*https://myhealth.alberta.ca/Health/Pages/conditions.aspx?hwidtv6824/ Returning to Play After a Head Injury During a Sporting Event
*https://www.nationwidechildrens.org/specialties/concussion-clinic/concussion-toolkit/an-athletes-guide-to-concussions/ An Athletes Guide to Concussions
* 


